we exist because of the binding energy curve.

BE of neutron is more than BE of proton due to the following reasons :

Neutrons are bound to the nucleus only due to the strong attractive force. Neutrons is bound to other neutrons and protons due to the strong nuclear force.  
Protons = strong attractive nuclear force + electromagnetic repulsive force 


LEC - 3

forces which act inside the nucleus are the : strong nuclear force and electromagnetic force

force between neutrons and protons = nucleon-nucleon force / residual strong force

force between the quarks = fundamental strong force

nucleon-nucleon force is not strong enough to hold the nucleus it is weak than electromagnetic force so neutrons are also needed along with protons inside the nucleus.

We want nucleon-nucleon force to be repulsive at very short distances that is less than 0.7 fm , so that nucleons do not smash into each other ( so as to maintain the structure of the nucleus ). 

mesons are particles that are exchanged between the nucleons to hold the particles together.

residual strong force = pi-mesons are the force carrying particles. The exchange of these particles causes the residual strong force to act between two nucleons.

electromagnetic force = photons are the force carrying particles.

gravitational force = graviton are the force carrying particles.

fundamental strong force = gluons are the force carrying particles.

Yukawa potential = all forces are associated with a potential and he predicted the nature of this potential.

Pauli exclusion principle = two identical fermions cannot come very close together unless some property is different. Pauli does not apply to two different particles ( hence neutrons and protons cannot come close together since they are made of quarks ). Pauli exclusion will act on the fermions.

At about 1 fm , nucleon-nucleon force is strongest. After this , it drops exponentially.

After 2 fm, only coulomb repusive force acts.

nuclear force is high between protons and neutrons than between protons and protons and neutrons and neutrons.

Yukawa hypothesis : 

exchange particles should have a mass of about of 200 times of electron. 

when particle is massless = no need for exponential term in numerator however if there is some mass, then exponential term should be there.

e^(-u r) factor in case of "decaying mass particle" like mesons.

Yukawa potential only predicts the attractive nature of nucleon-nucleon force ( and not the repulsive nature at short distances ). 




Lecture - 4 ( pg 5 - lecture notes 4 )

Models of the nucleus :

We want to find the models of the nucleus so that BE curve can be predicted with help of it.

Liquid drop model :

Nucleus behaves just like a drop of liquid.
Properties - it has uniform density, it tends towards a sphere, nucleons are interacting with only its nearest neighbours.


minimum possible energy = when the liquid drop attains the shape of a sphere.

For first term in BW-BE formula, we assume that all nucleons are inside the nucleus and not on the surface of the nucleus. 

alpha-1 = 6U

Volume energy = energy due to the nucleon-nucleon interaction if all the nucleons were to be inside the nucleus.

Nucleons inside the nucleus = surrounded by 6 nucleons around it ( in 2D ) and by 12 nucleons if ( in 3D). 

Nucleons on the surface = surrounded by 3 nucleons around it ( in 2D ) and 6 nucleons if ( in 3D ).

Surface energy = some of the nucleons are on the surface of the nucleus. It acts as the negative correction on the volume energy.

"BE of the nucleons inside the nucleus is more than the BE of the nucleons on the surface of the nucleus."

surface energy more important for lighter nuclei than heavy nuclei.

when nucleus is spherical = volume energy is more and surface energy is less.

liquids become a drop = so as to reduce the surface tension.

Coulomb energy = repulsion between the protons also decreases the binding energy term further.

pairs of protons = ZC2 

coulomb energy = depends on Z and A, derived from "protons" only.

first two terms of BW-BE formula : arrived by considering the nucleus as liquid drop

last term : due to columb repulsion between protons.

Volume energy = main term
surface energy = correction in formula

small variations in the BE/A curve / small kinks in the BE/A curve = cannot be explained by BW-BE formula.

Assymetry effect and pairing effect = gives us the approx. accurate BE/A curve ( these two terms assumes nucleus has a shell structure, nucleus has energy levels/shells ).

Shell model = gives the accurate model of nucleus.



Lec - 5


isotops = same Z, diff A
isobars = same A, diff N and Z

symmetrical nucleus = where N and Z are same tend to be more stable

less protons, more neutrons = less stable

Asymmetry effect = 

Pairing energy = experimentally it was found, binding energy gained for an even-even nucleus and reduced for an odd-odd nucleus

alphas can be found by fitting by comparing binding energy ( from experiment ) and from formula.

"alpha-c" is small because coulomb repulsion ( elctromagnetic force ) is weaker than nuclear force.

in lighter nuclei = shell structure is more reflected.



Vibrational spectra of the nucleus :

The nucleus is spherical and it gains some energy and then loses this energy to give vibrational spectra upon de-excitation.

monopole vibration = changes in volume but not in shape. ( breathing mode or vibration mode ). = requires large amount of energy

quadrupole = changes shape but not volume.

R(theta, phi) = position coordinate of the surface of the nucleus with repsect to the centre of the nucleus.



Lec - 6 ( Shell Model )

nucleus with N and Z or both as magic numbers are more stable. 


